11089 no dedup in changelog (#11346)
msupply-foundation/open-msupply: syncdoc/content/v7.md

</details>

### **de-duplication** {#de-duplication}

Changelog records are generally append only to minimise overhead to updating records in general, thus there will be multiple changelogs for the same record. 

Previous reasons for de-duplication:

1. To avoid syncing or processing the record multiple times by only considering the latest action for any particular record.  
2. De-duplication can also help reduce conditions when processing changelog, for example when a record is deleted it would have at least two entries in changelog, upsert followed by delete. If changelog is not deduped then when processing it, we would need to deal with a condition that a record may not exist at all, even though it has upsert operation.

> Changelog table will grow over time to be very big, it needs to be fast when queried, since it's integral part of sync we want to reduce overhead of that query. Although various optimisations can be done to indexing and queries, the best solution of the problem is sometimes the absence of the problem. We shouldn't try to de-duplicate on the go, only do it as a scheduled task, allow for duplicates and deal with those in application logic. This would mean

Reviewer: The first sentence really says the same thing twice - that the query needs to be fast due to it being a hot path.

```suggestion
Changelog table will grow over time to be very big as it has a row for every record in every other table in the database. As it's the core mechanism for selecting what records to pull from COMS we need to minimise overhead of querying the changelog to maintain high performance of COMS. Although various optimisations can be done to indexing and queries, the best solution of the problem is sometimes the absence of the problem. We shouldn't try to de-duplicate on the go, only do it as a scheduled task, allow for duplicates and deal with those in application logic. This would mean:
```

Author: Thanks yeah, that's much better !

1. If records that are reference by changelog are not found in database, skip them rather then surfacing errors
2. We will not have reliable 'count' of changelogs based on a particular filter, thus the progress indications will need to be changed from 'counts' to percentages of current cursor progress to max cursor
3. When a batch of particular size is being prepared (say for sync), and there we have a scenario from 1, then application logic will re-query changelog until batch is full

> 4. Together with inert only nature of sync_buffer we would have multiple operations in sync_buffer for the same record, in order to deal with this, we would de-duplicate in application logic (TODO link to sync buffer about this, to be added when sync_buffer research issues has PR)

Reviewer: inert/insert 
```suggestion
4. Together with sync_buffer being append only, after ROMS pulling from COMS we may have multiple operations in sync_buffer for the same record, in order to deal with this, we would de-duplicate in application logic (TODO link to sync buffer about this, to be added when sync_buffer research issues has PR)
```

(Same goes for COMS buffer after ROMS push but I omitted that for brevity)

Strictly speaking don't have to dedup? Could do upsert-upsert-upsert-delete heh but maybe better for performance to mitigate that.

Author: Cheers, I committed that one.

> Strictly speaking don't have to dedup? Could do upsert-upsert-upsert-delete heh but maybe better for performance to mitigate that.

yep, this optimisation not strictly needed, but there seems to be an easy way to do it, let's see if that holds when actually implementing :)
